Source: https://www.enchantingmarketing.com/creative-writing-techniques/

11 Creative Writing Techniques
Learn how to add pizzazz to any type of writing
The articles below show you how to use creative writing tools in fiction or non-fiction. Each article features a series of examples so it becomes easier to apply the technique.
List of creative writing techniques
Click the links below to go to a specific section:
Metaphors
Similes
Analogies
Imagery
Personification
Show don’t tell
Repetition in writing
Contrast in writing
The rule of three in writing
Parallelism
Switch the point of view
1. Metaphors
Metaphors compare a characteristic of something unknown to something known. They add a dash of fun and personality to your writing.
Learn how to use metaphors and get inspired by these examples …
Learn how to use metaphors >>
Metaphor examples >>
2. Similes
Similes compare two things by using the word
like
or
as
; metaphors compare two things without using
like
or
as
.
Get inspired by over 10 simile examples by various authors …
Simile examples >>
3. Analogies
Analogies go a step further than metaphors and similes by explaining the comparison between two things. This article shows how to use analogies to structure your blog posts.
Get inspired by these analogy examples …
Analogy examples >>
Improve your writing style
Learn how to write better and find your voice.
Get free writing tips in your inbox.
Get free writing tips >>
4. Imagery
As writers, we’re at a physical distance from our readers. But we can invite readers into our worlds, and make them feel like we’re together by using strong imagery.
Get inspired by these imagery examples …
Imagery examples >>
5. Personification
To make abstract sentences sparkle, imagine what would happen if an abstract idea or object had a human trait. I call this the Winnie-the-Pooh technique because Pooh walks, talks, thinks, and drinks tea like a human.
Learn how to use personification to make your writing sparkle …
Personification examples >>
6. Show don’t tell
To let readers experience your story,
show don’t tell
. Showing means using sensory details and describing actions to direct a mental movie in your reader’s mind.
Get inspired by these examples of “show, don’t tell” …
Show don’t tell examples >>
7. Repetition in writing
No matter what you write, whether it’s a blog post, sales copy, or poetry, purposeful repetition can add power and pizzazz to your writing. Word repetition adds rhythm, strengthens your message, and helps shape your voice.
Get inspired by these examples of word repetition …
Examples of repetition in writing >>
8. Contrast in writing
Without contrast, life would be pretty dull, and that’s true for writing, too. Contrast draws attention to our words and adds drama.
Discover how to use contrast in your writing …
Examples of contrast in writing >>
9. The rule of 3 in writing
Trios can create a sense of poetry and rhythm, making content more pleasurable to read, and adding stress to a statement. Pay attention to good writing, and you see threes popping up everywhere.
Get inspired by these examples of the rule of 3 …
The rule of 3 in writing >>
10. Parallelism in writing
Parallelism helps communicate your message with power and style. Plus, it makes your writing easier to read because readers recognize the patterns.
Get inspired by these examples of the parallelism …
Parallelism examples >>
11. Switch the point of view (POV)
Switching the point of view makes your voice more natural, and it allows you to control the pace, intimacy, and authority of your writing.
Discover how to switch the point of view …
Point of view examples >>
Improve your writing style
Learn how to write better and find your voice.
Get free writing tips in your inbox.
Get free writing tips >>
You may also like …
Creative writing examples
Learn how to inject creativity in any writing.
Creative writing examples »
Creative writing exercises
Try these exercises to add a touch of creativity to your writing.
Try these creative exercises »
Share this page:
Share
Share
Share
Share