The Ultimate Guide to Character Creation
One of the questions I hear and see over and over again is "How can I make 3 Dimensional Characters?" I define a 3 dimensional character as one that is life-like and invokes the emotions of the reader.

Like most writing, there is no secret formula for a successful character. So many of our favorite characters are so strikingly different from one another that there is no clear template that can be followed. Even if there was, who would want to follow it? But there is a secret to character development and it's this: Knowing the deepest crevices of your character.

How well you know you characters is vital to great fiction writing. If you don't know your character well, how do you expect to write well for them? How will you know how they would act or what they would say in the situations your story will present to them if you don't know them well?

One of the biggest complaints you will hear from readers is that all of the characters sound and act the same. They all have the "same voice." For your audience to know your characters well, you need to know your characters well. So the first and most important step of character creation is learning your character.The character survey below will you help you do just that.

Some people like to write out extensive biographies for their characters. Often times this can be extremely time consuming and it can also be difficult to navigate for future reference while you're writing your story. Instead I recommend trying the character survey.

Go through the character survey below and answer each question briefly. If you don't know the answer to something or think it isn't important, skip it and move on. After completing the character survey, you will definitely have a deeper understanding of the character you are creating.

Character Survey:

Name:

Sex:

Age:

Race:

Physical Appearance:

How does this character feel about their physical appearance?

Describe your character's upbringing (relationships, hobbies, location):

What is your character's best memory and worst memory?

How much education has your character had?

What kind of relationship does your character have with their family?

Does your character have any romance interests?

Does your character have any moral convictions?

Does your character have any religious beliefs?

Does your character have any children? How do they feel about children?

What does your character do for work? How is their relationship with their boss and coworkers?

Does your character like their job?

What does your character do for fun?

What makes your character excited?

What does your character fear the most?

What does your character dislike doing?

What is your character's philosophy on life?

Does your character have any political views?

Describe your character's personality (introvert, extrovert, shy, outgoing):

What emotions does your character feel the most?

What are your character's strengths and weaknesses?

What is your character proud of? What is your character ashamed of?

Is your character healthy or do they have any ailments?

How smart is your character?

What is your character's relationship with the other major characters?

Now that you know how your character functions in their daily life you need to determine how they will function in your story.

Describe your character's story-line in one sentence:

What is your character's motivation (what is their overall desire)?

What is your character's goal (what do they want)?

What strength will help your character achieve their goal? What weakness will hold your character back from achieving their goal?

What is your character's conflict (what prevents them from achieving their goal)?

What will your character learn? How will they change?

You need to get into the head of you character. You need to know them so well that you will know exactly how they would respond in each situation. You also need to know what they would say, which brings us to dialogue.

How articulate is your character?

Does your character have an accent or speech impediment or alternative dialect?

Does your character use slang or professional lingo?

Okay, I know that was a lot. Let's pause and take a deep breath. Now let me ask you, do you know your character better now?

After answering all of these questions about your characters you will know them immensely more than you did before.You will find that writing for them will become easier and finding their unique voice will be more natural. Only a fraction of this information will actually be portrayed in your story, but the full knowledge of all of this information will help you shape how your character behaves.

I hope you find this character survey helpful as you strive to create compelling, 3 dimensional characters. Is there anything else you would add to the survey? Did you find this survey helpful for creating characters? Please let me know in the comments below. Thanks for reading.